97 coding standards rebranch (#128)
CABLE-LSM/CABLE: documentation/docs/developer_guide/coding_standards.md

> ## Foreword

Author: IDK - there is a one on the page there now - I suppose if this is to replace that entire page OR it might just be included like a header.txt might be in a HTML file

## Introduction
CABLE is a community software project. 
For the benefit of the whole community, developers are required to adhere to certain coding standards that better enable portability, efficient maintenance, future development, performance, readability. 

Submitted developments that are inconsistent with the standards discussed below, and/or poorly commented/documented code will not be accepted without revision. 
## Coding Standards
Generic code examples are given below as well as a link to the JULES coding standards, to which CABLE is somewhat bound through the JULES and CABLE (JAC) project.  
Whilst syntax/text formatting style is relatively trivial, it must still be adhered to. Some more significant general rules that should be followed are: 
## The JAC project 
The JAC project is a long term initiative to include CABLE as an inter-operable Land-Surface Model (LSM) within the Unified Model (UM). For several reasons, CABLE is coupled to the UM via its native LSM, JULES. From a coding standards perspective, both the UM and JULES developments are strictly goverened by the UK Met Office and thus CABLE's coding standards are somewhat constrained by JULES' coding standards. 

> The [JULES coding standards](http://jules-lsm.github.io/coding_standards/) are described in this comprehensive document.

Author: Doh - stuff is moved around at the top. I see what you mean about the "general rules" thing. There were too many iterations, too far apart for me to keep on top of

> The [JULES coding standards](http://jules-lsm.github.io/coding_standards/) are described in this comprehensive document.

Author: all seems taken care of - let me know if you think it needs changing

### 1. IO must be restricted to the top level

> In terms of the offline application of the model this means IO should be restricted to the offline/ directory. Coupled to the UM/JULES there should be no IO code in the CABLE directory. 

Author: This is not quite right anyway. -we can omit the coupled to the UM bit. IO should only be in the offline directory.

### 2. Comment liberally

> Detrimental to any model is the lack of meaningful and/or outdated comments. 

Author: true - I had software initially

### 3. Avoid WHERE loops
WHERE loops effectively replace DO/IF loops. In some circumstances these may improve readability. They certainly make it easier to write code. However they are nightmare to debug and hamper portability. Especially nested WHERE loops. 
Moreover it will not pass JULES coding standards. 
### 4. Variable names
We are not so limited by the number of character spaces available as we once were. Developers are encouraged to name variables meaningfully. Of course commenting might make it clear what the variable corresponds to however it is helpful to be able to understand what is going on whilst reading a line of code.

Please maintain globally consistent names of variables across files/subroutines/modules. 
### 5. File names
To include CABLE code identifiably across applications, please include the "_cbl" suffix in your filename **eg. egName_cbl.F90**. 

Please maintain consistent naming between files/subroutines/modules. 
### 6. MODULE names
Everything should be contained within modules.
Modules should be of the form "*_mod_cbl". Following from the above file egName_cbl.F90 **MODULE egName_mod_cbl**.

### 7. SUBROUTINE names

> Subroutines should be of the form "*_cbl()". Following from the above file egName_cbl.F90 **SUBROUTINE egName_cbl()**.

Author: Honestly, my memory of how adamant JULES have been about this is wavering. They have flip-flopped over the years and instances of all permutations can be found. It is certainly true that it is very helpful to be able to search for _cbl and/or identify a CABLE file simply from its name. How far this applies to subroutines is more dubious.  It can be helpful, for e.g. in 10,000 line job.err files which might identify the subroutine where it crashed. There are several instances (and more to come) where we have a CABLE-alagous version of a JULES subroutine. An example,
``` 
IF (lsm_id == JULES) THEN
   CALL screen_temp() 
ELSE  
   CALL screen_temp_cbl() 
END IF
```
@ccarouge was the strongest proponent for file naming. I don't really care, but there is no doubt that it forces consistency and there isn't really a downside.

> Subroutines should be of the form "*_cbl()". Following from the above file egName_cbl.F90 **SUBROUTINE egName_cbl()**.

Reviewer: Okay, I can see now how it would be useful. Can you mention here something along those lines? Like "... which distinguishes CABLE versions of subroutines that are analogous to JULES subroutines."

### 8. Miscellaneous
 * The last character of a line MUST not be placed beyond column 80. 
 * SAVE attributes will not be permitted.
 * Intrinsic FORTRAN subroutines, functions, etc should be capitalized

>  * Subroutines start on the margin. As do headers. Indentation of two spaces

Author: Re-Declaration(s) ...... anything before the code actually begins I guess. The UM is littered with reference to headers. ! End header. etc. I guess I haven't really thought about C headers. I haven't touched it since year 1 in my PhD ~17 years ago.

>  * Subroutines start on the margin. As do headers. Indentation of two spaces

Reviewer: I've always thought this was called the preamble/non-executable statements/declaration section. Nevertheless, I think this could be avoided completely by being a bit more specific about what statements should start on the first line. Declarations, USE, TYPE, IMPLICIT, FUNCTION. What about CONTAINS?

>  * Subroutines start on the margin. As do headers. Indentation of two spaces

Author: There seems to have been an era where a UKMO programmer put !End of header comments at the end of every "preamble". Whilst perhaps not strictly correct it is very useful to skip to that  !End of header line. Especially when some of the "headers" are ~2000 lines.

Change made

   occurs in loops 
 * Specify IMPLICIT NONE ! prevents accidents 
 * Recieved arguments need to be (re)declared with the INTENT() attribute 
 * Declare in a MODULE header what is to be PUBLIC
 * Specify ONLY in USE statements. To avoid inadvertent inheritance and
   increase transparency of underlying data flow 
 * It is very useful to label either side of a loop. Especially if it covers
   more than a page.
 * Specify IMPLICIT NONE 
 * All IF constructs must be of the form:
```
IF() THEN 
  Even if they only contain a simple, single line statement following the IF. 
END IF
```
 * In summary, be pedantic, be clear

## Final Note about JAC
The UKMO is in the process of revising their entire suite of models, as part of a major program to create a Next Generation Modelling System (NGMS). 
The specific coding standards required of the NGMS have not yet been strictly defined. 
However, from a technical perspective the necessity of the project can be summarized as follows. 

> Excluding a quantum computing breakthrough, we as a community can no longer expect advances in hardware to enable higher performance. This means higher resolution, more sophisticated process description etc. We can however better  organize the software. 

Author: is this the sentence you mean. should be

"...... to enable higher performance, higher resolution, more sophisticated process,  etc.

> Excluding a quantum computing breakthrough, we as a community can no longer expect advances in hardware to enable higher performance. This means higher resolution, more sophisticated process description etc. We can however better  organize the software. 

Reviewer: Yeah. Does it mean that higher resolution improves performance -- makes the model better? Or are you trying to say that models are becoming more sophisticated and hardware is reaching a limit to accommodate these improvements? I think it should be rephrased more clearly.

> Excluding a quantum computing breakthrough, we as a community can no longer expect advances in hardware to enable higher performance. This means higher resolution, more sophisticated process description etc. We can however better  organize the software. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Excluding a quantum computing breakthrough, we as a community can no longer expect advances in hardware to enable higher performance as model resolution increases and more processes are developed. We can however better  organize the software. 
```

In the main our models (including CABLE), have evolved over decades, involving dozens of developers. A key feature emerging from NGMS is the tight reign on memory. As such it will not be permitted to USE data through MODULEs. Data must be passed through argument lists. There are further rules emerging in this respect which relax the rules slightly to allow time independent scalars to be USEd. Nevertheless it is straight-forward enough to pass these as well. 

## Specific Develoments
Code developments broadly fall into two categories. Bug fixes and new developments. Both can of course involve a wide range of complexity. However, at the extremes a bug fix may be as simple as moving a bracket. Alternatively, the bug fix might require you to rewrite a section, or even several sections of code. 
A new development might be as simple as an alternative section or calculation, or it might be an entirely new model that can be plugged in to CABLE. Either as an alternative model, or an extra feature to be used in the standard model.

> In all cases an issue should be raised. The accompanying fix contained should then be implemented in a unique branch, corresponding to the raised issue. A bugfix might simply ivolve reference to this issue. For a more complicated, added feature, it is a requirement that this addition can be isolated, switched off via a configuration switch. So that the model can be run, and return results as if there had been no addition. There is of course every possibility that this feature will be accepted as a standard part of the model. Although this is not the expectation initially and the developer should be mindful of this fundamental requirement. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In all cases, an issue should be raised. The accompanying fix contained should then be implemented in a unique branch, corresponding to the raised issue. A bugfix might simply involve reference to this issue. For a more complicated added feature, it is a requirement that this addition can be isolated and switched off via a configuration switch, so that the model can be also run as if there had been no addition. There is every possibility that this feature will be accepted as a standard part of the model. Although, this is not the expectation initially and the developer should be mindful of this fundamental requirement. 
```

We proceed assuming that the "issue" raised requires adding a new and significant feature to CABLE, requiring the addition of new files/modules to CABLE. Lesser modifications are covered under this assumption anyway.

For discussion purposes we assume that you are including a new model to do some new stuff. This can conveniently be added in a single file. 

## Code Template 

> Assuming the *new* model is called from eg_driver.F90.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming the *new* model is called from `eg_driver.F90`.
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```fortran
```

Author: Do you mean just adding the word "fortran"? Do you think this makes it clearer that a bunch of statements go here?

Reviewer: No i mean this is markdown for specifying the language of the code block. it add fortran syntax highlighting.

Author: cool feature. I'll add it

PROGRAM eg_driver()

USE new_mod_cbl, ONLY : new

IMPLICIT NONE
Header Declarations
...
CALL eg_subr( Arguments )
...

END PROGRAM eg_driver
```
Where,

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```fortran
```

MODULE eg_mod_cbl
! Module description in markdown - see??

PUBLIC :: eg_subr 
PRIVATE

CONTAINS

SUBROUTINE eg_subr ( Arguments )
...
END SUBROUTINE eg_subr 

END MODULE eg_mod_cbl
```

Where,

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```fortran
```

Submitted developments that are inconsistent with the standards discussed below, and/or poorly commented/documented code will not be accepted without revision. 

The JULES and CABLE (JAC) project is a long term initiative to include CABLE as an inter-operable Land-Surface Model (LSM) within the Unified Model (UM). For several reasons, CABLE is coupled to the UM via its native LSM, JULES. From a coding standards perspective, both the UM and JULES developments are strictly goverened by the UK Met Office and thus CABLE's coding standards are somewhat constrained the [JULES coding standards](http://jules-lsm.github.io/coding_standards/).

Currently not all of the CABLE code is compliant with the standards described here. Work is in progress to apply these standards across the existing code base, however these standards are expected to be met by any new development.

Whilst syntax/text formatting style is relatively trivial, it must still be adhered to. Some more significant general rules follow.

## General Rules

### 1. IO must be restricted to the top level

> In terms of the offline application of the model this means IO should be restricted to the offline/ directory. There should be no IO code elsewhere in the CABLE directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In terms of the offline application of the model this means IO should be restricted to the `offline/` directory. There should be no IO code elsewhere in the CABLE directory. 
```
otherwise it looks like offline/directory

Moreover it will not pass JULES coding standards. 

### 4. Variable names

We are not so limited by the number of character spaces available as we once were. Developers are encouraged to name variables meaningfully. Commenting might make it clear what the variable corresponds to, however, it is helpful to be able to understand what is going on whilst reading a line of code.

Please maintain globally consistent names of variables across files, subroutines and modules. 

### 5. File names

To include CABLE code identifiably across applications, please name the file with a `_cbl` suffix in your filename.
For example: `egName_cbl.F90`. 

Please maintain consistent naming between files, subroutines and modules. 

### 6. MODULE names

Everything should be contained within modules.
Modules should be named of the form `*_mod_cbl`. Following from the above example, the file `egName_cbl.F90` should contain the module declaration `MODULE egName_mod_cbl`

### 7. SUBROUTINE names

> Subroutines should be of the form "*_cbl()". Following from the above file egName_cbl.F90 **SUBROUTINE egName_cbl()**. This is not only helpful for consonsistency but necessary within JULES/UM applications where it distinguishes the CABLE version of an analagous JULES subroutine. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subroutines should be of the form "\*_cbl()". Following from the above file `egName_cbl.F90` `SUBROUTINE egName_cbl()`. This is not only helpful for consistency but necessary within JULES/UM applications where it distinguishes the CABLE version of an analogous JULES subroutine. 
Markdown needs to escape * characters.
```

 * Specify `IMPLICIT NONE` in all modules to prevent type mismatch errors 
 * Dummy arguments must be declared with the `INTENT()` attribute
 * Declare in the `MODULE` preamble which elements are `PUBLIC`
 * Import specific components using `ONLY` with `USE` statements to avoid inadvertent inheritance and
   increase transparency of underlying data flow 
 * Label each side of a loop, especially if it extends
   more than a page.
 * All `IF` constructs must be of the form:
```fortran
IF() THEN 
  Even if they only contain a simple, single line statement following the IF. 
END IF
```
 * In summary, be pedantic, be clear

## Final Note about JAC

Scientific models have naturally evolved over time to include increasing complexity. Coupled with the demand for higher resolution, larger ensembles etc, this has required ever increasing computational performance.
For several decades, this icreasing performance demand has been met by technological advances in hardware.   
This era has come to an end.

> The Next Generation Modelling System (NGMS) is a major program at the UKMO to address this issue.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Next Generation Modelling System (NGMS) is a major program at the UKMO to address this issue.
```

The NGMS is an initiative to optimize the software of their entire suite of models.
The specific coding standards required by the NGMS have not yet been strictly defined. 

In general, models (including CABLE) have evolved over decades, involving dozens of developers. A key feature emerging from NGMS is the tight reign on memory. As such, it will not be permitted to `USE` data through `MODULE`s. Data will be be passed through argument lists. There are further rules emerging in this respect which relax the rules slightly to allow time independent scalars to be `USE`d. Nevertheless, it is straightforward enough to pass these as well. 

## Specific Develoments

> Code developments broadly fall into two categories. Bug fixes and new developments. Both can involve a wide range of complexity. However, at the extremes a bug fix may be as simple as moving a bracket. Alternatively, the bug fix might require you to rewrite a section, or even several sections of code. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Code developments broadly fall into two categories: bug fixes and new developments. Both can involve a wide range of complexity. However, at the extremes a bug fix may be as simple as moving a bracket. Alternatively, the bug fix might require you to rewrite a section, or even several sections of code. 
```

Whilst syntax/text formatting style is relatively trivial, it must still be adhered to. Some more significant general rules follow.

## General Rules

### 1. IO must be restricted to the top level

In terms of the offline application of the model this means IO should be restricted to the `offline/` directory. There should be no IO code elsewhere in the CABLE directory. 

### 2. Comment liberally

Detrimental to any software is the lack of meaningful and/or outdated comments. 
Liberal inline commenting is expected, as well as use of Markdown for FORD generated documentation. See [cable_roughness.F90](https://github.com/CABLE-LSM/CABLE/blob/main/src/science/roughness/cable_roughness.F90) for an example, which is then redered [here](https://cable.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/module/cable_roughness_module.html)

### 3. Avoid WHERE loops

`WHERE` loops are sometimes used in stead of `DO` loops with an `IF`. In some circumstances, this may improve readability and is easier to write. However, they are difficult to debug, hamper portability and are therefore discouraged. 
Moreover it will not pass JULES coding standards. 

> ### 4. Variable names
> 
> We are not so limited by the number of character spaces available as we once were. Developers are encouraged to name variables meaningfully. Commenting might make it clear what the variable corresponds to, however, it is helpful to be able to understand what is going on whilst reading a line of code.
> 
> Please maintain globally consistent names of variables across files, subroutines and modules. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 4. Variable names

Developers are encouraged to name variables meaningfully, and remember the number of characters for variables is not anymore limited. A variable name should help to understand what is going on when reading the code without fully relying on comment lines. 

Maintain globally consistent names of variables across files, subroutines and modules. 
```

> ### 5. File names
> 
> To include CABLE code identifiably across applications, please name the file with a `_cbl` suffix in your filename.
> For example: `egName_cbl.F90`. 
> 
> Please maintain consistent naming between files, subroutines and modules. 
> 
> ### 6. MODULE names
> 
> Everything should be contained within modules.
> Modules should be named of the form `*_mod_cbl`. Following from the above example, the file `egName_cbl.F90` should contain the module declaration `MODULE egName_mod_cbl`

Reviewer 2: Currently, we are using `cbl_` as a prefix so modified it for that. I don't understand what "maintain consistent naming between files, modules and subroutines" means. We already give rules for files, modules and subroutines. That's enough and clearer than a vague "consistency". 

```suggestion
### 5. File names

All files in CABLE source code should use the prefix `cbl_` in their name.
For example: `cbl_egName.F90`. 

### 6. MODULE names

Everything should be contained within modules.
Modules should be named using the filename followed by a `_mod` suffix. For example, the file `cbl_egName.F90` should contain the module declaration `MODULE cbl_egName_mod`
```

> ### 7. SUBROUTINE names
> 
> Subroutines should be of the form "\*_cbl()". Following from the above file `egName_cbl.F90` `SUBROUTINE egName_cbl()`. This is not only helpful for consistency but necessary within JULES/UM applications where it distinguishes the CABLE version of an analogous JULES subroutine. 
> Markdown needs to escape * characters.

Reviewer 2: We are not using this convention in the code we submitted to JaC. So I would remove unless we want to rename everything.
```suggestion
### 7. SUBROUTINE names

Subroutines should be of the form "\*_cbl()". Following from the above file `egName_cbl.F90` `SUBROUTINE egName_cbl()`. This is not only helpful for consistency but necessary within JULES/UM applications where it distinguishes the CABLE version of an analogous JULES subroutine. 
```

 * Declare in the `MODULE` preamble which elements are `PUBLIC`
 * Import specific components using `ONLY` with `USE` statements to avoid inadvertent inheritance and
   increase transparency of underlying data flow 
 * Label each side of a loop, especially if it extends
   more than a page.
 * All `IF` constructs must be of the form:
```fortran
IF() THEN 
  Even if they only contain a simple, single line statement following the IF. 
END IF
```
 * In summary, be pedantic, be clear

## Final Note about JAC

Scientific models have naturally evolved over time to include increasing complexity. Coupled with the demand for higher resolution, larger ensembles etc, this has required ever increasing computational performance.
For several decades, this icreasing performance demand has been met by technological advances in hardware.   
This era has come to an end.
The Next Generation Modelling System (NGMS) is a major program at the UKMO to address this issue.
The NGMS is an initiative to optimize the software of their entire suite of models.
The specific coding standards required by the NGMS have not yet been strictly defined. 

> In general, models (including CABLE) have evolved over decades, involving dozens of developers. A key feature emerging from NGMS is the tight reign on memory. As such, it will not be permitted to `USE` data through `MODULE`s. Data will be be passed through argument lists. There are further rules emerging in this respect which relax the rules slightly to allow time independent scalars to be `USE`d. Nevertheless, it is straightforward enough to pass these as well. 

Reviewer 2: Do we need this?

The rule to pass arguments instead of `USE` should be stated as a rule and not lost in a full paragraph.

Author: listed as a rule. 

see - dc5b6d7e9

A new development might be as simple as an alternative section or calculation, or it might be an entirely new model that can be plugged in to CABLE, either as an alternative model, or an extra feature to be used in the standard model.

In all cases, an issue should be raised. The accompanying fix contained should then be implemented in a unique branch, corresponding to the raised issue. A bugfix might simply involve reference to this issue. For a more complicated, added feature, it is a requirement that this addition can be isolated and switched off via a configuration switch, so that the model can be also run as if there had been no alteration. There is of course every possibility that this feature will be accepted as a standard part of the model. Although this is not the expectation initially and the developer should be mindful of this fundamental requirement. 

We proceed assuming that the "issue" raised requires adding a new and significant feature to CABLE, requiring the addition of new files/modules to CABLE. Lesser modifications are covered under this assumption anyway.

> For discussion purposes we assume that you are including a new model to do some new stuff. This can conveniently be added in a single file. 

Reviewer 2: This is not about coding standards. To remove. The only things we need is about putting new development in a switch and that would go in the contribution workflow, not here.

Author: done

20d4f88e4

## Code Template 

> Assuming the *new* model is called from eg_driver.F90.

Reviewer 2: Why are we talking of anything new? It is just a template of what various pieces of code should look like. I'd remove this sentence.

```suggestion
```

```fortran
PROGRAM eg_driver()

> USE new_mod_cbl, ONLY : new

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
USE cbl_eg_mod, ONLY : eg_subr
```

Author: I thought the plan was to end everything with _cbl. I'm not fussed. I prefer it this way anyway

IMPLICIT NONE
Header Declarations
...
CALL eg_subr( Arguments )
...

END PROGRAM eg_driver
```
Where,

```fortran

> MODULE eg_mod_cbl

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MODULE cbl_eg_mod
```

> ! Module description in markdown - e.g. [cable_roughness.F90](https://github.com/CABLE-LSM/CABLE/blob/main/src/science/roughness/cable_roughness.F90) for an example, which is then redered [here](https://cable.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/module/cable_roughness_module.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
! Module description in markdown - e.g. [cable_roughness.F90](https://github.com/CABLE-LSM/CABLE/blob/main/src/science/roughness/cable_roughness.F90) for an example, which is then rendered [here](https://cable.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/module/cable_roughness_module.html)
```

PUBLIC :: eg_subr 
PRIVATE

CONTAINS

SUBROUTINE eg_subr ( Arguments )
...
END SUBROUTINE eg_subr 

> END MODULE eg_mod_cbl

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
END MODULE cbl_eg_mod
```

```

Where,

```fortran
SUBROUTINE eg_subr( eg_arg, ilen, jlen, sometype )
! Subroutine description in markdown - see??

> USE some_type_mod_cbl, ONLY : some_type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
USE cbl_some_type_mod, ONLY : some_type
```

IMPLICIT NONE

INTEGER, INTENT(IN) :: ilen              ! example arg length
INTEGER, INTENT(IN) :: jlen              ! example arg length
REAL, INTENT(OUT) :: eg_arg(ilen,jlen)   ! example arg [kg//m^2/s]

!local variables
REAL :: eg_local(ilen,jlen)              ! example local [kg//m^2/s]

> DO i=1,ilen                         ! DO:over ilen
> 
>   DO j=1,jlen                       ! DO:over jlen
>   
>     IF( condition1 ) THEN           ! IF:condition1  
>   
>       IF( condition1.1 ) THEN       ! IF:condition1.1  
>         
>         eg_arg = some_type%some_type_member1 * some_type%some_type_member2     &
>                 * some_type%some_type_member3 
>       
>       ENDIF                         ! IF:condition1.1  
>       
>     ELSE
>         
>       IF( condition1.2 ) THEN       ! IF:condition1.2  
>       
>         eg_arg = some_type%some_type_member1 * some_type%some_type_member2     &
>                 * some_type%some_type_member4 
>       
>       ENDIF                         ! IF:condition1.2    
>                           
>     ENDIF                           ! IF:condition1
>   
>   END DO                            ! DO:over jlen
> 
> END DO                              ! DO:over ilen

Reviewer 2: Why not use construct names here (for all the loops and if statements) instead? This way the names are actually useful and the compiler can warn us if something isn't right.

```suggestion
ilen_loop: DO i=1,ilen

  jlen_loop: DO j=1,jlen
  
    condition1: IF( condition1 ) THEN
  
      condition1.1: IF( condition1.1 ) THEN  
        
        eg_arg = some_type%some_type_member1 * some_type%some_type_member2     &
                * some_type%some_type_member3 
      
      END IF condition1.1
      
    ELSE
        
      condition1.2: IF( condition1.2 ) THEN 
      
        eg_arg = some_type%some_type_member1 * some_type%some_type_member2     &
                * some_type%some_type_member4 
      
      END IF condition1.2
                          
    END IF condition1
  
  END DO jlen_loop

END DO ilen_loop
```
